---
layout: post
date:   2022-10-07 01:46:10 +0800
title:  My personal experience of vim 
---
I've been configuring my personal vim for several days. Below are details.

I won't labor on the basic knowledge of vim, such as hjkl movement, different modes and how to quit vim :) e.t.c.

My personal configuration of vim is available at [my gitee repository](https://gitee.com/burning489/vim-settings).

I installed several plugins for convenience and appearance. They are fzf, nerdtree, easymotion, tagbar and lightline. You can search for more on [VimAwesome](https://vimawesome.com). I will refer to these plugins later on.                                                                                                                                                                      

## Some personal tricks

I want share some pure-vim tricks useful to me.

- `<c-n>` in insert mode for auto-completion
- `[[` or `]]` in normal mode for quick jump between functions
- `#` or `*` for quick search of the word under cursor backward and forward
- `gg=G` in normal mode for auto-indention for all lines
- `gi` in normal mode to go to last insertion place
- `<c-i>` or `<c-o>` to quick jump
- `cf<char>` to quick change to first occurance of `<char>`(included) in line, you can use `c2f<char>` to change to the second occurance if you have sharp eyes
- `ci(` or `"` or `p` or `<` e.t.c. to quick change a range of characters

As most vimmers do, I remap jk into ESC to quit insert mode.  

## Plugins

Vim will allocate memory(buffers) for each file you opend. Once you edit some file, its raw contents is read from file into buffers, and your modification will be written back into file after you save it by `:w`. I use fzf.vim to manage my buffers by `<leader>b`.

Your screen will always show one tab. You can split (horizontally or vertically) into windows. `<c-w>` is the default prefix for window comamnd. I remap several commands so that I can switch between windows quickly by `<c-hjkl>` without prefix. I also remap + and _ to resize window vertically and `<leader>,` and `<leader>.` to resize horizontally. Vim takes `:sp` and `:vsp` by default to split current buffer into windows. I remap them into `<leader>%` and `<leader>"` thanks to tmux inspiration.

Windows are not enough as your screnn might not display all files of interest. That's where tabs come in. I use `<leader>n` to create a new tab and `<leader>x` to kill one. I use `<leader>n` to go to tab #n. For adjacent tabs, I use `<leader>h` and `<leader>l` to navigate.

To quick jump inside a complicated project, I recommend fzf and fzf.vim to ease your pain. It's based on tags inforamtion generated by tags or ctags. I remap `<leader>b` f t s to quick search in buffers, files, tags and current file.

To quick jump inside a file, I use easymoion. It helps in the occassion where I want to change to, say 5th occurance of e in a line. Simply ffe and type coresponding index. You can go to its repository page for more information.

For project structure, I use nerdtree and keep only two mappings useful to me: `<c-b>` to toggle nerdtree and `<c-n>` to start it as I might want to restart it at base directory.

I like the outline of VS Code and found its alternative in vim: tagbar. I remap `<F8>` to toggle it.

I use lightline to prettify my statusline and make it more colorful. I tried vim-airline but it seems too clumsy for me. I did a little customizaion of the plugin: show current tag name on the left side of statusline as I need to know which part I am at in the current file.

## regex

My demands of an editor mainly consists of a. quick navigation in project b. quick navigation inside one file c. quick change of characters without the pain of manual seletion via mouse d. highly customizable shortcuts. These demands are met by native vim features and plugins like fzf.vim and easymotion.

But I'd like to spend some efforts on regular expression in vim. It's native and quite similar to that in other linux command line tools like sed, awk and grep. `.` stands for any single character, `[]` stands for a set, e.g. `[aeiou]` and `[^]` means the complentary set, `\a` for alphabet characters and `\A` the complementary. `\d` for digits and `\s` for white spaces, `\u` and `\l` for upper and lower cases, `\w` for alphanumeric and underscore. The uppercase ones are always complementary of lowercase ones. `*`, `\?`, `\+` and `\{num}` share the same meaning as other regex. `^` for beginning of line and `$` for the end. `\<` and `\>` for word boundary. `\|` for or and `\(regex\)` to save pattern in `\1`, `\2`,... for substitute later.

The substitute command in vim is quite simple: `:[range]s/before/after/[gci]`

To substitute in current file set range to `%` as its alias for current file, to substitute in specific lines, set range to `#startln, #endln`, note that line number can be relative to current position. `g` means substitute all, `c` requires confirmation at each substitution and `i` means case insensitive match.

As you may find that always need to type qualifier `\` annoying, it's convinient to type `\v` at beginning of `before`.

## ...

I've been trying emacs and vim back and forth for quite a long time. I also tried VS Code with vim extension, but the migration sometimes doesn't fit me well. I prefer the native vim interaction. Emacs is good, especially with lisp support, but I just ran into vim earlier and its philosophy influenced me ever since. Perhaps that's why I picked it up again after years. 

For now I haven't known vimscript quite well. I might consider learn more about it to make my personal vim better handy.
